Department of Computer Science
COURSE OUTLINES (SYLLABI) FOR UNDERGRADUATE COURSES
CS3346A/CS3121A/CS9146A Course Outline
Introduction to Artificial Intelligence, Fall 2021
1. Course Information
Course Information
The course is an introduction to Artificial Intelligence. We will cover the fundamentals used in the
construction of intelligent agents, including heuristic search, computer games, probabilistic reasoning,
Bayesian networks, machine learning, and so on.
List of Prerequisites
Either (Computer Science 2210A/B and 2211A/B or 2121A/B or (Software Engineering
2203A/B, 2205A/B and 2250A/B); Computer Science 2209A/B, or registration in the BESc
program in Computer Engineering or Software Engineering.. Please see Academic Calendar
for details.
Unless you have either the requisites for this course or written special permission from your Dean to
enroll in it, you may be removed from this course and it will be deleted from your record. This decision
may not be appealed. You will receive no adjustment to your fees in the event that you are dropped
from a course for failing to have the necessary prerequisites.
2. Instructor Information
Dr. Charles Ling, Professor of Computer Science
Email: charles.ling@uwo.ca (preferred way of contact), Office MC 374, x 83341
Office hours: TBD
3. Course Schedule, Delivery Mode
Due to a special arrangement, approved by the Dean and Dept Chair, this course will be delivered
online this term, via ZOOM. Here is the ZOOM link, https://westernuniversity.zoom.us/j/92554023362
with passcode: 112233. More specifically:
1. All lectures will be delivered in actual lecture time (Tu 1:30 to 2:30; Fri 1:30 to 3:30) via ZOOM, and
recorded. The video will be uploaded on the same day for students to view and review.
2. Midterm and final exams will be conducted in classrooms (closed-book exams, with extra rooms for
exam-style spacing).
3. Both on-campus (by appointment) and online office hours will be offered to meet students
individually.
As this is an online course, you must have a stable internet connection, computer with working
microphone and/or webcam. In addition, ZOOM must be installed.
Key Sessional Dates:
Classes begin: September 8, 2021
Reading Week: November 1–7, 2021
Classes end: December 8, 2021
4. Course Materials
Textbook: Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (3rd Ed; by Stuart J. Russell and Peter
Norvig).
Students are responsible for checking the course OWL site (http://owl.uwo.ca) on a regular basis for
news and updates. This is the primary method by which information will be disseminated to all
students in the class. In addition, if the TAs and instructor receive multiple emails about the
same/similar questions, we will send out an Announcement via OWL, instead of replying to
every email. Please review Announcements in OWL constantly.
If students need assistance with the course OWL site, they can seek support on the OWL Help page.
Alternatively, they can contact the Western Technology Services Helpdesk. They can be contacted by
phone at 519-661-3800 or ext. 83800.
5. Methods of Evaluation
● Three assignments worth 15% each.
● Midterm: 25%, tentatively scheduled on Nov 12 (in-class midterm)
● Final Exam: 30% (covering the whole term)
All assignments are due by midnight of the due date.
Assignment 1: Due 10/6
Assignment 2: Due 11/8
Assignment 3: Due 12/8
Late Assignment Policy of assignments:
1 day late: -10%
2 days late: -30%
3 days late: -100%
Accommodated Evaluations
Generally, no extensions to assignments will be given (except for lengthy illness, or other
compassionate grounds). In those cases where an extension is granted, the course instructor
can grant the extension. If you have serious medical or compassionate grounds for an
extension, you should take supporting documentation to the office of the Dean of your faculty,
who will contact the instructor.
There will be no makeup Midterm Exam, except for students requesting a Special Midterm
Exam for religious reasons. These students must have notified the course instructor and filed
documentation with their Dean's office at least 2 weeks prior to the Midterm Exam in question.
If you miss the Midterm Exam for any other reason, and present valid documentation to the
Dean's office, your Final Exam mark will be reweighted to include the weight of the Midterm
Exam. You must notify the course instructor within a week of the missed Midterm Exam, and
documentation must be received by your Dean's office within 2 weeks of the missed exam.
If for any reason the assignment schedule given below cannot be adhered to, the assignment
marks will be prorated. (The n assignments are worth k% of the overall mark for the course. If
an assignment has to be cancelled for any reason, the remaining assignment weights will be
prorated to add up to k%.)
Every effort will be made to have assignments marked and handed back within 3 weeks of the
handin date, preferably sooner.
6. Student Absences
Academic Consideration for Student Absences
Students who experience an extenuating circumstance (illness, injury or other extenuating
circumstance) sufficiently significant to temporarily render them unable to meet academic
requirements may submit a request for academic consideration through the following routes:
(i) Submitting a Self-Reported Absence (SRA) form provided that the conditions for submission are
met. To be eligible for a Self-Reported Absence:
• an absence must be no more than 48 hours
• the assessments must be worth no more than 30% of the student’s final grade
• no more than two SRAs may be submitted during the Fall/Winter term
(ii) For medical absences, submitting a Student Medical Certificate (SMC) signed by a licensed
medical or mental health practitioner to the Academic Counselling office of their Faculty of
Registration.
(iii) Submitting appropriate documentation for non-medical absences to the Academic Counselling
office in their Faculty of Registration.
Note that in all cases, students are required to contact their instructors within 24 hours of the end of
the period covered, unless otherwise instructed in the course outline.
Students should also note that individual instructors are not permitted to receive documentation
directly from a student, whether in support of an application for consideration on medical grounds, or
for other reasons. All documentation required for absences that are not covered by the Self-Reported
Absence Policy must be submitted to the Academic Counselling office of a student's Home Faculty.
For the policy on Academic Consideration for Student Absences – Undergraduate Students in First Entry
Programs, see:
https://www.uwo.ca/univsec/pdf/academic_policies/appeals/accommodation_illness.pdf
and for the Student Medical Certificate (SMC), see:
http://www.uwo.ca/univsec/pdf/academic_policies/appeals/medicalform.pdf.
Religious Accommodation
When a course requirement conflicts with a religious holiday that requires an absence from the
University or prohibits certain activities, students should request accommodation for their absence in
writing at least two weeks prior to the holiday to the course instructor and/or the Academic
Counselling office of their Faculty of Registration. Please consult University's list of recognized religious
holidays (updated annually) at
https://multiculturalcalendar.com/ecal/index.php?s=c-univwo.
Absences from Final Examinations
If you miss the Final Exam, please contact the Academic Counselling office of your Faculty of
Registration as soon as you are able to do so. They will assess your eligibility to write the Special
Examination (the name given by the University to a makeup Final Exam).
You may also be eligible to write the Special Exam if you are in a “Multiple Exam Situation” (e.g., more
than 2 exams in 23-hour period, more than 3 exams in a 47-hour period).
If a student fails to write a scheduled Special Examination, the date of the next Special Examination (if
granted) normally will be the scheduled date for the final exam the next time this course is offered.
The maximum course load for that term will be reduced by the credit of the course(s) for which the
final examination has been deferred. See the Academic Calendar for details (under Special
Examinations).
6. Accommodation and Accessibility
Accommodation Policies
Students with disabilities work with Accessible Education (formerly SSD), which provides
recommendations for accommodation based on medical documentation or psychological and cognitive
testing. The policy on Academic Accommodation for Students with Disabilities can be found at:
https://www.uwo.ca/univsec/pdf/academic_policies/appeals/Academic Accommodation_disabilities.pdf,
7. Academic Policies
The website for Registrarial Services is http://www.registrar.uwo.ca.
In accordance with policy,
https://www.uwo.ca/univsec/pdf/policies_procedures/section1/mapp113.pdf,
the centrally administered e-mail account provided to students will be considered the individual’s
official university e-mail address. It is the responsibility of the account holder to ensure that e-mail
received from the University at his/her official university address is attended to in a timely manner.
Electronic devices will not be permitted on exams.
Scholastic offences are taken seriously and students are directed to read the appropriate policy,
specifically, the definition of what constitutes a Scholastic Offence, at the following Web site:
http://www.uwo.ca/univsec/pdf/academic_policies/appeals/scholastic_discipline_undergrad.pdf.
All required papers may be subject to submission for textual similarity review to the commercial
plagiarism detection software under license to the University for the detection of plagiarism. All papers
submitted for such checking will be included as source documents in the reference database for the
purpose of detecting plagiarism of papers subsequently submitted to the system. Use of the service is
subject to the licensing agreement, currently between The University of Western Ontario and
Turnitin.com (http://www.turnitin.com).
Assignments and exams may be subject to submission for similarity review by software that will check
for unusual coincidences in answer patterns that may indicate cheating.
In the event of health lock-down, examinations in this course may be conducted using a remote
proctoring service. By taking this course, you are consenting to the use of this software and
acknowledge that you will be required to provide personal information (including some biometric data)
and the session will be recorded. Completion of this course will require you to have a reliable internet
connection and a device that meets the technical requirements for this service. More information
about this remote proctoring service, including technical requirements, is available on Western’s
Remote Proctoring website at:
https://remoteproctoring.uwo.ca.
8. Support Services
Please visit the Science & Basic Medical Sciences Academic Counselling webpage for information on
adding/dropping courses, academic considerations for absences, appeals, exam conflicts, and many
other academic related matters: https://www.uwo.ca/sci/counselling/.
Please contact the course instructor if you require lecture or printed material in an alternate format or
if any other arrangements can make this course more accessible to you. You may also wish to contact
Accessible Education at (519) 661-2147 if you have any questions regarding accommodations.
Western University is committed to a thriving campus as we deliver our courses in the mixed model of
both virtual and face-to-face formats. We encourage you to check out the Digital Student Experience
website to manage your academics and well-being: https://www.uwo.ca/se/digital/.
Learning-skills counsellors at the Student Development Centre (http://www.sdc.uwo.ca) are ready to
help you improve your learning skills. They offer presentations on strategies for improving time
management, multiple-choice exam preparation/writing, textbook reading, and more. Individual
support is offered throughout the Fall/Winter terms in the drop-in Learning Help Centre, and
year-round through individual counselling.
Students who are in emotional/mental distress should refer to Mental Health@Western
(http://www.health.uwo.ca/mentalhealth) for a complete list of options about how to obtain help.
Additional student-run support services are offered by the USC, http://westernusc.ca/services.